The Great Gatsby
F. Scott Fitzgerald
read by William hope
Then wear the gold hat, if that will move
her;
If you can bounce high, bounce for her too,
Till she cry “Lover, gold-hatted, high-bouncing
lover,
I must have you!”
Thomas Parke D’Invilliers.
The Great Gatsby, by F. Scott Fitzgerald
Chapter 1
In my younger and more vulnerable years my
father gave me some advice that I’ve been
turning over in my mind ever since.
“Whenever you feel like criticizing any
one,” he told me, “just remember that
all the people in this world haven’t had
the advantages that you’ve had.”
He didn’t say any more, but we’ve always
been unusually communicative in a reserved
way, and I understood that he meant a great
deal more than that. In consequence, I’m
inclined to reserve all judgments, a habit
that has opened up many curious natures to
me and also made me the victim of not a few
veteran bores. The abnormal mind is quick
to detect and attach itself to this quality
when it appears in a normal person, and so
it came about that in college I was unjustly
accused of being a politician, because I was
privy to the secret griefs of wild, unknown
men. Most of the confidences were unsought
— frequently I have feigned sleep, preoccupation,
or a hostile levity when I realized by some
unmistakable sign that an intimate revelation
was quivering on the horizon; for the intimate
revelations of young men, or at least the
terms in which they express them, are usually
plagiaristic and marred by obvious suppressions.
Reserving judgments is a matter of infinite
hope. I am still a little afraid of missing
something if I forget that, as my father snobbishly
suggested, and I snobbishly repeat, a sense
of the fundamental decencies is parcelled
out unequally at birth.
And, after boasting this way of my tolerance,
I come to the admission that it has a limit.
Conduct may be founded on the hard rock or
the wet marshes, but after a certain point
I don’t care what it’s founded on. When
I came back from the East last autumn I felt
that I wanted the world to be in uniform and
at a sort of moral attention forever; I wanted
no more riotous excursions with privileged
glimpses into the human heart. Only Gatsby,
the man who gives his name to this book, was
exempt from my reaction — Gatsby, who represented
everything for which I have an unaffected
scorn. If personality is an unbroken series
of successful gestures, then there was something
gorgeous about him, some heightened sensitivity
to the promises of life, as if he were related
to one of those intricate machines that register
earthquakes ten thousand miles away. This
responsiveness had nothing to do with that
flabby impressionability which is dignified
under the name of the “creative temperament.”—
it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a romantic
readiness such as I have never found in any
other person and which it is not likely I
shall ever find again. No — Gatsby turned
out all right at the end; it is what preyed
on Gatsby, what foul dust floated in the wake
of his dreams that temporarily closed out
my interest in the abortive sorrows and short-winded
elations of men.
My family have been prominent, well-to-do
people in this Middle Western city for three
generations. The Carraways are something of
a clan, and we have a tradition that we’re
descended from the Dukes of Buccleuch, but
the actual founder of my line was my grandfather’s
brother, who came here in fifty-one, sent
a substitute to the Civil War, and started
the wholesale hardware business that my father
carries on to-day.
I never saw this great-uncle, but I’m supposed
to look like him — with special reference
to the rather hard-boiled painting that hangs
in father’s office. I graduated from New
Haven in 1915, just a quarter of a century
after my father, and a little later I participated
in that delayed Teutonic migration known as
the Great War. I enjoyed the counter-raid
so thoroughly that I came back restless. Instead
of being the warm centre of the world, the
Middle West now seemed like the ragged edge
of the universe — so I decided to go East
and learn the bond business. Everybody I knew
was in the bond business, so I supposed it
could support one more single man. All my
aunts and uncles talked it over as if they
were choosing a prep school for me, and finally
said, “Why — ye — es,” with very grave,
hesitant faces. Father agreed to finance me
for a year, and after various delays I came
East, permanently, I thought, in the spring
of twenty-two.
The practical thing was to find rooms in the
city, but it was a warm season, and I had
just left a country of wide lawns and friendly
trees, so when a young man at the office suggested
that we take a house together in a commuting
town, it sounded like a great idea. He found
the house, a weather-beaten cardboard bungalow
at eighty a month, but at the last minute
the firm ordered him to Washington, and I
went out to the country alone. I had a dog
— at least I had him for a few days until
he ran away — and an old Dodge and a Finnish
woman, who made my bed and cooked breakfast
and muttered Finnish wisdom to herself over
the electric stove.
It was lonely for a day or so until one morning
some man, more recently arrived than I, stopped
me on the road.
“How do you get to West Egg village?”
he asked helplessly.
I told him. And as I walked on I was lonely
no longer. I was a guide, a pathfinder, an
original settler. He had casually conferred
on me the freedom of the neighborhood.
And so with the sunshine and the great bursts
of leaves growing on the trees, just as things
grow in fast movies, I had that familiar conviction
that life was beginning over again with the
summer.
There was so much to read, for one thing,
and so much fine health to be pulled down
out of the young breath-giving air. I bought
a dozen volumes on banking and credit and
investment securities, and they stood on my
shelf in red and gold like new money from
the mint, promising to unfold the shining
secrets that only Midas and Morgan and Maecenas
knew. And I had the high intention of reading
many other books besides. I was rather literary
in college — one year I wrote a series of
very solemn and obvious editorials for the
“Yale News.”— and now I was going to
bring back all such things into my life and
become again that most limited of all specialists,
the “well-rounded man.” This isn’t just
an epigram — life is much more successfully
looked at from a single window, after all.
It was a matter of chance that I should have
rented a house in one of the strangest communities
in North America. It was on that slender riotous
island which extends itself due east of New
York — and where there are, among other
natural curiosities, two unusual formations
of land. Twenty miles from the city a pair
of enormous eggs, identical in contour and
separated only by a courtesy bay, jut out
into the most domesticated body of salt water
in the Western hemisphere, the great wet barnyard
of Long Island Sound. They are not perfect
ovals — like the egg in the Columbus story,
they are both crushed flat at the contact
end — but their physical resemblance must
be a source of perpetual confusion to the
gulls that fly overhead. To the wingless a
more arresting phenomenon is their dissimilarity
in every particular except shape and size.
I lived at West Egg, the — well, the less
fashionable of the two, though this is a most
superficial tag to express the bizarre and
not a little sinister contrast between them.
My house was at the very tip of the egg, only
fifty yards from the Sound, and squeezed between
two huge places that rented for twelve or
fifteen thousand a season. The one on my right
was a colossal affair by any standard — it
was a factual imitation of some Hotel de Ville
in Normandy, with a tower on one side, spanking
new under a thin beard of raw ivy, and a marble
swimming pool, and more than forty acres of
lawn and garden. It was Gatsby’s mansion.
Or, rather, as I didn’t know Mr. Gatsby,
it was a mansion inhabited by a gentleman
of that name. My own house was an eyesore,
but it was a small eyesore, and it had been
overlooked, so I had a view of the water,
a partial view of my neighbor’s lawn, and
the consoling proximity of millionaires — all
for eighty dollars a month.
Across the courtesy bay the white palaces
of fashionable East Egg glittered along the
water, and the history of the summer really
begins on the evening I drove over there to
have dinner with the Tom Buchanans. Daisy
was my second cousin once removed, and I’d
known Tom in college. And just after the war
I spent two days with them in Chicago.
Her husband, among various physical accomplishments,
had been one of the most powerful ends that
ever played football at New Haven — a national
figure in a way, one of those men who reach
such an acute limited excellence at twenty-one
that everything afterward savors of anti-climax.
His family were enormously wealthy — even
in college his freedom with money was a matter
for reproach — but now he’d left Chicago
and come East in a fashion that rather took
your breath away: for instance, he’d brought
down a string of polo ponies from Lake Forest.
It was hard to realize that a man in my own
generation was wealthy enough to do that.
Why they came East I don’t know. They had
spent a year in France for no particular reason,
and then drifted here and there unrestfully
wherever people played polo and were rich
together. This was a permanent move, said
Daisy over the telephone, but I didn’t believe
it — I had no sight into Daisy’s heart,
but I felt that Tom would drift on forever
seeking, a little wistfully, for the dramatic
turbulence of some irrecoverable football
game.
And so it happened that on a warm windy evening
I drove over to East Egg to see two old friends
whom I scarcely knew at all. Their house was
even more elaborate than I expected, a cheerful
red-and-white Georgian Colonial mansion, overlooking
the bay. The lawn started at the beach and
ran toward the front door for a quarter of
a mile, jumping over sun-dials and brick walks
and burning gardens — finally when it reached
the house drifting up the side in bright vines
as though from the momentum of its run. The
front was broken by a line of French windows,
glowing now with reflected gold and wide open
to the warm windy afternoon, and Tom Buchanan
in riding clothes was standing with his legs
apart on the front porch.
He had changed since his New Haven years.
Now he was a sturdy straw-haired man of thirty
with a rather hard mouth and a supercilious
manner. Two shining arrogant eyes had established
dominance over his face and gave him the appearance
of always leaning aggressively forward. Not
even the effeminate swank of his riding clothes
could hide the enormous power of that body
— he seemed to fill those glistening boots
until he strained the top lacing, and you
could see a great pack of muscle shifting
when his shoulder moved under his thin coat.
It was a body capable of enormous leverage
— a cruel body.
His speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added
to the impression of fractiousness he conveyed.
There was a touch of paternal contempt in
it, even toward people he liked — and there
were men at New Haven who had hated his guts.
“Now, don’t think my opinion on these
matters is final,” he seemed to say, “just
because I’m stronger and more of a man than
you are.” We were in the same senior society,
and while we were never intimate I always
had the impression that he approved of me
and wanted me to like him with some harsh,
defiant wistfulness of his own.
We talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch.
“I’ve got a nice place here,” he said,
his eyes flashing about restlessly.
Turning me around by one arm, he moved a broad
flat hand along the front vista, including
in its sweep a sunken Italian garden, a half
acre of deep, pungent roses, and a snub-nosed
motor-boat that bumped the tide offshore.
“It belonged to Demaine, the oil man.”
He turned me around again, politely and abruptly.
“We’ll go inside.”
We walked through a high hallway into a bright
rosy-colored space, fragilely bound into the
house by French windows at either end. The
windows were ajar and gleaming white against
the fresh grass outside that seemed to grow
a little way into the house. A breeze blew
through the room, blew curtains in at one
end and out the other like pale flags, twisting
them up toward the frosted wedding-cake of
the ceiling, and then rippled over the wine-colored
rug, making a shadow on it as wind does on
the sea.
The only completely stationary object in the
room was an enormous couch on which two young
women were buoyed up as though upon an anchored
balloon. They were both in white, and their
dresses were rippling and fluttering as if
they had just been blown back in after a short
flight around the house. I must have stood
for a few moments listening to the whip and
snap of the curtains and the groan of a picture
on the wall. Then there was a boom as Tom
Buchanan shut the rear windows and the caught
wind died out about the room, and the curtains
and the rugs and the two young women ballooned
slowly to the floor.
The younger of the two was a stranger to me.
She was extended full length at her end of
the divan, completely motionless, and with
her chin raised a little, as if she were balancing
something on it which was quite likely to
fall. If she saw me out of the corner of her
eyes she gave no hint of it — indeed, I
was almost surprised into murmuring an apology
for having disturbed her by coming in.
The other girl, Daisy, made an attempt to
rise — she leaned slightly forward with
a conscientious expression — then she laughed,
an absurd, charming little laugh, and I laughed
too and came forward into the room.
“I’m p-paralyzed with happiness.” She
laughed again, as if she said something very
witty, and held my hand for a moment, looking
up into my face, promising that there was
no one in the world she so much wanted to
see. That was a way she had. She hinted in
a murmur that the surname of the balancing
girl was Baker. (I’ve heard it said that
Daisy’s murmur was only to make people lean
toward her; an irrelevant criticism that made
it no less charming.)
At any rate, Miss Baker’s lips fluttered,
she nodded at me almost imperceptibly, and
then quickly tipped her head back again — the
object she was balancing had obviously tottered
a little and given her something of a fright.
Again a sort of apology arose to my lips.
Almost any exhibition of complete self-sufficiency
draws a stunned tribute from me.
I looked back at my cousin, who began to ask
me questions in her low, thrilling voice.
It was the kind of voice that the ear follows
up and down, as if each speech is an arrangement
of notes that will never be played again.
Her face was sad and lovely with bright things
in it, bright eyes and a bright passionate
mouth, but there was an excitement in her
voice that men who had cared for her found
difficult to forget: a singing compulsion,
a whispered “Listen,” a promise that she
had done gay, exciting things just a while
since and that there were gay, exciting things
hovering in the next hour.
I told her how I had stopped off in Chicago
for a day on my way East, and how a dozen
people had sent their love through me.
“Do they miss me?” she cried ecstatically.
“The whole town is desolate. All the cars
have the left rear wheel painted black as
a mourning wreath, and there’s a persistent
wail all night along the north shore.”
“How gorgeous! Let’s go back, Tom. To-morrow!”
Then she added irrelevantly: “You ought
to see the baby.”
“I’d like to.”
“She’s asleep. She’s three years old.
Haven’t you ever seen her?”
“Never.”
“Well, you ought to see her. She’s ——”
Tom Buchanan, who had been hovering restlessly
about the room, stopped and rested his hand
on my shoulder.
“What you doing, Nick?”
“I’m a bond man.”
“Who with?”
I told him.
“Never heard of them,” he remarked decisively.
This annoyed me.
“You will,” I answered shortly. “You
will if you stay in the East.”
“Oh, I’ll stay in the East, don’t you
worry,” he said, glancing at Daisy and then
back at me, as if he were alert for something
more. “I’d be a God damned fool to live
anywhere else.”
At this point Miss Baker said: “Absolutely!”
with such suddenness that I started — it
was the first word she uttered since I came
into the room. Evidently it surprised her
as much as it did me, for she yawned and with
a series of rapid, deft movements stood up
into the room.
“I’m stiff,” she complained, “I’ve
been lying on that sofa for as long as I can
remember.”
“Don’t look at me,” Daisy retorted,
“I’ve been trying to get you to New York
all afternoon.”
“No, thanks,” said Miss Baker to the four
cocktails just in from the pantry, “I’m
absolutely in training.”
Her host looked at her incredulously.
“You are!” He took down his drink as if
it were a drop in the bottom of a glass. “How
you ever get anything done is beyond me.”
I looked at Miss Baker, wondering what it
was she “got done.” I enjoyed looking
at her. She was a slender, small-breasted
girl, with an erect carriage, which she accentuated
by throwing her body backward at the shoulders
like a young cadet. Her gray sun-strained
eyes looked back at me with polite reciprocal
curiosity out of a wan, charming, discontented
face. It occurred to me now that I had seen
her, or a picture of her, somewhere before.
“You live in West Egg,” she remarked contemptuously.
“I know somebody there.”
“I don’t know a single ——”
“You must know Gatsby.”
“Gatsby?” demanded Daisy. “What Gatsby?”
Before I could reply that he was my neighbor
dinner was announced; wedging his tense arm
imperatively under mine, Tom Buchanan compelled
me from the room as though he were moving
a checker to another square.
Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly
on their hips, the two young women preceded
us out onto a rosy-colored porch, open toward
the sunset, where four candles flickered on
the table in the diminished wind.
“Why candles?” objected Daisy, frowning.
She snapped them out with her fingers. “In
two weeks it’ll be the longest day in the
year.” She looked at us all radiantly. “Do
you always watch for the longest day of the
year and then miss it? I always watch for
the longest day in the year and then miss
it.”
“We ought to plan something,” yawned Miss
Baker, sitting down at the table as if she
were getting into bed.
“All right,” said Daisy. “What’ll
we plan?” She turned to me helplessly: “What
do people plan?”
Before I could answer her eyes fastened with
an awed expression on her little finger.
“Look!” she complained; “I hurt it.”
We all looked — the knuckle was black and
blue.
“You did it, Tom,” she said accusingly.
“I know you didn’t mean to, but you did
do it. That’s what I get for marrying a
brute of a man, a great, big, hulking physical
specimen of a ——”
“I hate that word hulking,” objected Tom
crossly, “even in kidding.”
“Hulking,” insisted Daisy.
Sometimes she and Miss Baker talked at once,
unobtrusively and with a bantering inconsequence
that was never quite chatter, that was as
cool as their white dresses and their impersonal
eyes in the absence of all desire. They were
here, and they accepted Tom and me, making
only a polite pleasant effort to entertain
or to be entertained. They knew that presently
dinner would be over and a little later the
evening too would be over and casually put
away. It was sharply different from the West,
where an evening was hurried from phase to
phase toward its close, in a continually disappointed
anticipation or else in sheer nervous dread
of the moment itself.
“You make me feel uncivilized, Daisy,”
I confessed on my second glass of corky but
rather impressive claret. “Can’t you talk
about crops or something?”
I meant nothing in particular by this remark,
but it was taken up in an unexpected way.
“Civilization’s going to pieces,” broke
out Tom violently. “I’ve gotten to be
a terrible pessimist about things. Have you
read ‘The Rise of the Colored Empires’
by this man Goddard?”
“Why, no,” I answered, rather surprised
by his tone.
“Well, it’s a fine book, and everybody
ought to read it. The idea is if we don’t
look out the white race will be — will be
utterly submerged. It’s all scientific stuff;
it’s been proved.”
“Tom’s getting very profound,” said
Daisy, with an expression of unthoughtful
sadness. “He reads deep books with long
words in them. What was that word we ——”
“Well, these books are all scientific,”
insisted Tom, glancing at her impatiently.
“This fellow has worked out the whole thing.
It’s up to us, who are the dominant race,
to watch out or these other races will have
control of things.”
“We’ve got to beat them down,” whispered
Daisy, winking ferociously toward the fervent
sun.
“You ought to live in California —” began
Miss Baker, but Tom interrupted her by shifting
heavily in his chair.
“This idea is that we’re Nordics. I am,
and you are, and you are, and ——” After
an infinitesimal hesitation he included Daisy
with a slight nod, and she winked at me again.
“— And we’ve produced all the things
that go to make civilization — oh, science
and art, and all that. Do you see?”
There was something pathetic in his concentration,
as if his complacency, more acute than of
old, was not enough to him any more. When,
almost immediately, the telephone rang inside
and the butler left the porch Daisy seized
upon the momentary interruption and leaned
toward me.
“I’ll tell you a family secret,” she
whispered enthusiastically. “It’s about
the butler’s nose. Do you want to hear about
the butler’s nose?”
“That’s why I came over to-night.”
“Well, he wasn’t always a butler; he used
to be the silver polisher for some people
in New York that had a silver service for
two hundred people. He had to polish it from
morning till night, until finally it began
to affect his nose ——”
“Things went from bad to worse,” suggested
Miss Baker.
“Yes. Things went from bad to worse, until
finally he had to give up his position.”
For a moment the last sunshine fell with romantic
affection upon her glowing face; her voice
compelled me forward breathlessly as I listened
— then the glow faded, each light deserting
her with lingering regret, like children leaving
a pleasant street at dusk.
The butler came back and murmured something
close to Tom’s ear, whereupon Tom frowned,
pushed back his chair, and without a word
went inside. As if his absence quickened something
within her, Daisy leaned forward again, her
voice glowing and singing.
“I love to see you at my table, Nick. You
remind me of a — of a rose, an absolute
rose. Doesn’t he?” She turned to Miss
Baker for confirmation: “An absolute rose?”
This was untrue. I am not even faintly like
a rose. She was only extemporizing, but a
stirring warmth flowed from her, as if her
heart was trying to come out to you concealed
in one of those breathless, thrilling words.
Then suddenly she threw her napkin on the
table and excused herself and went into the
house.
Miss Baker and I exchanged a short glance
consciously devoid of meaning. I was about
to speak when she sat up alertly and said
“Sh!” in a warning voice. A subdued impassioned
murmur was audible in the room beyond, and
Miss Baker leaned forward unashamed, trying
to hear. The murmur trembled on the verge
of coherence, sank down, mounted excitedly,
and then ceased altogether.
“This Mr. Gatsby you spoke of is my neighbor
——” I said.
“Don’t talk. I want to hear what happens.”
“Is something happening?” I inquired innocently.
“You mean to say you don’t know?” said
Miss Baker, honestly surprised. “I thought
everybody knew.”
“I don’t.”
“Why ——” she said hesitantly, “Tom’s
got some woman in New York.”
“Got some woman?” I repeated blankly.
Miss Baker nodded.
“She might have the decency not to telephone
him at dinner time. Don’t you think?”
Almost before I had grasped her meaning there
was the flutter of a dress and the crunch
of leather boots, and Tom and Daisy were back
at the table.
“It couldn’t be helped!” cried Daisy
with tense gaiety.
She sat down, glanced searchingly at Miss
Baker and then at me, and continued: “I
looked outdoors for a minute, and it’s very
romantic outdoors. There’s a bird on the
lawn that I think must be a nightingale come
over on the Cunard or White Star Line. He’s
singing away ——” Her voice sang: “It’s
romantic, isn’t it, Tom?”
“Very romantic,” he said, and then miserably
to me: “If it’s light enough after dinner,
I want to take you down to the stables.”
The telephone rang inside, startlingly, and
as Daisy shook her head decisively at Tom
the subject of the stables, in fact all subjects,
vanished into air. Among the broken fragments
of the last five minutes at table I remember
the candles being lit again, pointlessly,
and I was conscious of wanting to look squarely
at every one, and yet to avoid all eyes. I
couldn’t guess what Daisy and Tom were thinking,
but I doubt if even Miss Baker, who seemed
to have mastered a certain hardy scepticism,
was able utterly to put this fifth guest’s
shrill metallic urgency out of mind. To a
certain temperament the situation might have
seemed intriguing — my own instinct was
to telephone immediately for the police.
The horses, needless to say, were not mentioned
again. Tom and Miss Baker, with several feet
of twilight between them, strolled back into
the library, as if to a vigil beside a perfectly
tangible body, while, trying to look pleasantly
interested and a little deaf, I followed Daisy
around a chain of connecting verandas to the
porch in front. In its deep gloom we sat down
side by side on a wicker settee.
Daisy took her face in her hands as if feeling
its lovely shape, and her eyes moved gradually
out into the velvet dusk. I saw that turbulent
emotions possessed her, so I asked what I
thought would be some sedative questions about
her little girl.
“We don’t know each other very well, Nick,”
she said suddenly. “Even if we are cousins.
You didn’t come to my wedding.”
“I wasn’t back from the war.”
“That’s true.” She hesitated. “Well,
I’ve had a very bad time, Nick, and I’m
pretty cynical about everything.”
Evidently she had reason to be. I waited but
she didn’t say any more, and after a moment
I returned rather feebly to the subject of
her daughter.
“I suppose she talks, and — eats, and
everything.”
“Oh, yes.” She looked at me absently.
“Listen, Nick; let me tell you what I said
when she was born. Would you like to hear?”
“Very much.”
“It’ll show you how I’ve gotten to feel
about — things. Well, she was less than
an hour old and Tom was God knows where. I
woke up out of the ether with an utterly abandoned
feeling, and asked the nurse right away if
it was a boy or a girl. She told me it was
a girl, and so I turned my head away and wept.
‘all right,’ I said, ‘I’m glad it’s
a girl. And I hope she’ll be a fool — that’s
the best thing a girl can be in this world,
a beautiful little fool.”
“You see I think everything’s terrible
anyhow,” she went on in a convinced way.
“Everybody thinks so — the most advanced
people. And I know. I’ve been everywhere
and seen everything and done everything.”
Her eyes flashed around her in a defiant way,
rather like Tom’s, and she laughed with
thrilling scorn. “Sophisticated — God,
I’m sophisticated!”
The instant her voice broke off, ceasing to
compel my attention, my belief, I felt the
basic insincerity of what she had said. It
made me uneasy, as though the whole evening
had been a trick of some sort to exact a contributory
emotion from me. I waited, and sure enough,
in a moment she looked at me with an absolute
smirk on her lovely face, as if she had asserted
her membership in a rather distinguished secret
society to which she and Tom belonged.
Inside, the crimson room bloomed with light.
Tom and Miss Baker sat at either end of the
long couch and she read aloud to him from
the Saturday Evening Post. — the words,
murmurous and uninflected, running together
in a soothing tune. The lamp-light, bright
on his boots and dull on the autumn-leaf yellow
of her hair, glinted along the paper as she
turned a page with a flutter of slender muscles
in her arms.
When we came in she held us silent for a moment
with a lifted hand.
“To be continued,” she said, tossing the
magazine on the table, “in our very next
issue.”
Her body asserted itself with a restless movement
of her knee, and she stood up.
“Ten o’clock,” she remarked, apparently
finding the time on the ceiling. “Time for
this good girl to go to bed.”
“Jordan’s going to play in the tournament
to-morrow,” explained Daisy, “over at
Westchester.”
“Oh — you’re Jordan Baker.”
I knew now why her face was familiar — its
pleasing contemptuous expression had looked
out at me from many rotogravure pictures of
the sporting life at Asheville and Hot Springs
and Palm Beach. I had heard some story of
her too, a critical, unpleasant story, but
what it was I had forgotten long ago.
“Good night,” she said softly. “Wake
me at eight, won’t you.”
“If you’ll get up.”
“I will. Good night, Mr. Carraway. See you
anon.”
“Of course you will,” confirmed Daisy.
“In fact I think I’ll arrange a marriage.
Come over often, Nick, and I’ll sort of
— oh — fling you together. You know — lock
you up accidentally in linen closets and push
you out to sea in a boat, and all that sort
of thing ——”
“Good night,” called Miss Baker from the
stairs. “I haven’t heard a word.”
“She’s a nice girl,” said Tom after
a moment. “They oughtn’t to let her run
around the country this way.”
“Who oughtn’t to?” inquired Daisy coldly.
“Her family.”
“Her family is one aunt about a thousand
years old. Besides, Nick’s going to look
after her, aren’t you, Nick? She’s going
to spend lots of week-ends out here this summer.
I think the home influence will be very good
for her.”
Daisy and Tom looked at each other for a moment
in silence.
“Is she from New York?” I asked quickly.
“From Louisville. Our white girlhood was
passed together there. Our beautiful white
——”
“Did you give Nick a little heart to heart
talk on the veranda?” demanded Tom suddenly.
“Did I?” She looked at me.
“I can’t seem to remember, but I think
we talked about the Nordic race. Yes, I’m
sure we did. It sort of crept up on us and
first thing you know ——”
“Don’t believe everything you hear, Nick,”
he advised me.
I said lightly that I had heard nothing at
all, and a few minutes later I got up to go
home. They came to the door with me and stood
side by side in a cheerful square of light.
As I started my motor Daisy peremptorily called:
“Wait!”
“I forgot to ask you something, and it’s
important. We heard you were engaged to a
girl out West.”
“That’s right,” corroborated Tom kindly.
“We heard that you were engaged.”
“It’s libel. I’m too poor.”
“But we heard it,” insisted Daisy, surprising
me by opening up again in a flower-like way.
“We heard it from three people, so it must
be true.”
Of course I knew what they were referring
to, but I wasn’t even vaguely engaged. The
fact that gossip had published the banns was
one of the reasons I had come East. You can’t
stop going with an old friend on account of
rumors, and on the other hand I had no intention
of being rumored into marriage.
Their interest rather touched me and made
them less remotely rich — nevertheless,
I was confused and a little disgusted as I
drove away. It seemed to me that the thing
for Daisy to do was to rush out of the house,
child in arms — but apparently there were
no such intentions in her head. As for Tom,
the fact that he “had some woman in New
York.” was really less surprising than that
he had been depressed by a book. Something
was making him nibble at the edge of stale
ideas as if his sturdy physical egotism no
longer nourished his peremptory heart.
Already it was deep summer on roadhouse roofs
and in front of wayside garages, where new
red gas-pumps sat out in pools of light, and
when I reached my estate at West Egg I ran
the car under its shed and sat for a while
on an abandoned grass roller in the yard.
The wind had blown off, leaving a loud, bright
night, with wings beating in the trees and
a persistent organ sound as the full bellows
of the earth blew the frogs full of life.
The silhouette of a moving cat wavered across
the moonlight, and turning my head to watch
it, I saw that I was not alone — fifty feet
away a figure had emerged from the shadow
of my neighbor’s mansion and was standing
with his hands in his pockets regarding the
silver pepper of the stars. Something in his
leisurely movements and the secure position
of his feet upon the lawn suggested that it
was Mr. Gatsby himself, come out to determine
what share was his of our local heavens.
I decided to call to him. Miss Baker had mentioned
him at dinner, and that would do for an introduction.
But I didn’t call to him, for he gave a
sudden intimation that he was content to be
alone — he stretched out his arms toward
the dark water in a curious way, and, far
as I was from him, I could have sworn he was
trembling. Involuntarily I glanced seaward
— and distinguished nothing except a single
green light, minute and far away, that might
have been the end of a dock. When I looked
once more for Gatsby he had vanished, and
I was alone again in the unquiet darkness.